Welcome to the Texas Department
of Transportation, Yoakum
District’s, Virtual Public
Hearing for the I-10 proposed
Improvement Project from
Farm-to- Market Road 2434 to US
Highway 90 (Alleyton Road
South).
This is a pre-recorded
presentation on behalf of the
Texas Department of
Transportation.
I would like to welcome you.
And thank you for participating
in this virtual public hearing
During the Virtual Public
Hearing.
You may pause the presentation
and navigate forward or
backward using your video player,
This virtual presentation will
cover the same information that
the Yoakum District will share
online, and at the in-person
public hearing option
Details on how to submit a
comment and have your questions
addressed will be covered later
in this presentation.
In this presentation, I will
describe the proposed project
and explain the purpose of the
Virtual Public Hearing, provide
a project and environmental
overview,
explain the TxDOT right-of-way,
process The proposed projects
next steps and outline the
methods for submitting comments.
TxDOT encourages you to review
the materials posted on the
Virtual Public Hearing website.
And to provide written comments,
The comment form is located on
the hearing website.
Comments must be received via
email or mailed and postmarked
by Friday, October 8th, 2021 to
be included in the official
Virtual Public Hearing summary
report.
You can submit written comments
in the following ways:
Via email to Alan.Migl.@Txdot.
gov
Spelled A-L-A-N.M-I-G-L@TxDOT.
Via Mail t the TxDOT Yoakum
District Attentio: Alan Migl
403 Huck Street Yoakum, Texas
You may also leave a comment
verbally by calling
(979)459-2467.
Again, responses to the
comments received during the
comment period will be included
in the virtual public hearing
summary report that will be
posted on the project website
in approximately four months.
Notices for this virtual public
hearing were provided as
follows,
Elected official letters were
mailed and emailed on August 27,
Notices were mailed directly to
adjacent property owners on
August 31, 2021
Virtual Public Hearing Notices
for published in English and
Spanish in the Colorado County
citizen on September 1, 2021
and in the Columbus Banner
Press on September 2, 2012.
Information was posted to the
TxDOT website on September 3,
2021,
and on Twitter @TxDOTYoakum on
September 14, 2021 and
September 20, 2021.
The I-10 Improvement Project
from FM 2434 to US 90 (Alleyton
Road South) is receiving
federal funds,
and because of the federal
component, TxDOT is required to
assess the potential
environmental effects of the
proposed project in accordance
with federal standards.
The process that is followed is
called the National
Environmental Policy Act
process, otherwise known as NEPA.
The NEPA process analyses of
the potential impacts to the
natural and manmade environment,
and helps the decision maker to
make an informed decision on
whether or not to proceed with
the project.
On December 9, 2019 TxDOT
received a sign Memorandum of
Understanding from the Federal
Highway Administration that
permits TxDOT to assume
responsibility from the Federal
Highway Administration for
reviewing and approving certain
assignments or projects.
This review and approval
process applies to this project.
The proposed project study
limits are along I-10 from FM
2434 to US 90 (Alleyton Road
South), which is approximately
six miles.Improvements include
improvements of the Business SH
71 Intersection with I-10
improvements to US 90
intersection with I-10, and a
realignment of the Colorado
River Bridge. The project is
located in Colorado County, Texas
The project setting in the City
of Columbus, and the towns of
Glidden and Alleyton on either
side of Columbus.
The Proposed I-10 Project is
needed due to the increased and
projected local and regional
growth, which is caused traffic
demand to exceed the capacity
of the roadway,
address design defiencies and
increased accident rates, and
to provide a safe and reliable
hurricane evacuation route for
the region.
The purpose of the Proposed
I-10 Project is to meet local
and regional future travel
demands by increasing capacity,
Improving the safety of the
roadway by correcting design
defiencies,
upgrading the facility to meet
current design standards, and
provide a safe and reliable
hurricane evacuation route.
The project started in 2018.
The proposed project was first
presented to the public and
September 2018
Following the public meeting,
the project design was revised
and refined to accommodate the
public needs within the project
corridor, as well as analyze
and address the potential
impacts to regulated resources.
A Notice of Oopportunity to
Comment was sent to affected in
adjacent landowners in February
2020 to discuss proposed design
changes.
Following that series of
meetings with local
stakeholders and elected
officials,
additional design modifications
were made.
Our project team updated
environmental and social impact
assessments from the proposed
new design.
The findings of these
assessments are presented at
this public hearing, along with
the preferred alternative for
public review and comments.
Now let's talk about daily
traffic volumes and level of
service along I-10,
what it is today, and what is
projected for the future.
Level of Service (LOS) is
Illustrated in the graphic on
this slide.
The Average DailyTraffic (ADT)
for
I-10 within the proposed
project limits, was 43,310
vehicles per day (or vpd) in 2018
And is projected to be seventy
thousand, seven hundred
vehicles per day by 2040
Level of service ratings range
from A,
free flowing traffic, as shown
in light green to F
which is heavily congested, as
shown in red.
In general, a level of service
A through D is considered
acceptable and a Level of
Service.
E or F is considered
unacceptable in terms of delays
experienced by the traveling
public.
The I-10 corridor from FM 2434
to US 90 (Alleyton Road South).
is currently functioning at an
average Level of Service C,
with limited points at Level of
Service D to E, in 2020,
Without improvements.
the 2045 No Build conditions
are projected to deteriorate to
Levels of Service ranging from
C to F.
The goal of the proposed
project is to improve mobility
to an acceptable Level of
Service.
The 2025 built alternative
Level of Service is anticipated
to be a Level of Service B,
and in 2045 build Level of
Service is anticipated to be an
average level of C.
The project team analyze crash
data for the project corridor
for the years 2016 through 2020.
In this time frame, a total of
750 crashes occurred within the
corridor, which is three times
higher than the state average
crash rate with an average of
two crashes per week.
Seven crashes were fatal or
severe between 2017 and 2020
and 17 serious injury crashes
occurred in the segment of I-10
between 2016 and 2020.
To improve safety and reduce
crashes within the corridor,
a realignment of the Colorado
River Bridge
and it's approaches is
recommended
TxDOT, but is proposing to
reconstruct and widen the
existing foiling divided item
facility to a six-lane divided
facility with three twelve foot
wide mainlanes In each
Direction with 12-foot inside
and outside shoulders.
The existing two-way frontage
roads would be converted to a
one-way frontage road in each
direction, and will consist of
two 12-foot lanes with
four-foot inside shoulders and
eight-foot outside shoulders,
Two U-turn options
would be added for access and
to limit the distance between
turnaround options in the
corridor,
The roadway would maintain an
open ditch system along the
length of the proposed project.
The bridge over the Colorado
River would be reconstructed on
a new alignment as a six-lane
divided facility to improve
safety.
Improvements to the US 90
intersection are also proposed
to realign the intersection
Improvements to the Business SH
71 intersection at I-10 are
also planned.
The existing i-10 ROW
varies within the project
limits,
typically ranging from 324 feet
at its narrowest to 490 feet at
its widest,
averaging approximately 400
feet in width.
Approximately 84 acres of new
ROW would be required for the
proposed project.
The graphic shown above
illustrates the existing
typical section.
Within the proposed project
limits,
the roadway primarily consists
of a four-lane divided facility
with two 12-foot main lanes in
each direction and an open
ditch drainage system.
The existing westbound mainlane
outside shoulders, are 11 feet
wide and are designated as an
emergency evacuation lane.
The existing eastbound,
mainlane outside shoulders, are
an average of 10 feet wide.
Both eastbound and westbound
inside shoulders are four feet
wide.
Two, 11-foot-wide, two-way
frontage roads are adjacent to
the mainlanes in each direction.
The existing ROW with ranges
from 324 feet at its narrowest
to 490 feet at its widest
averaging approximately 400 feet.
The graphic on this slide shows
the proposed typical section
for the facility.
As noted earlier, the proposed
typical section would include a
six-lane divided facility with
three, twelve foot wide main
leads in each Direction and
12-foot wide inside and outside
shoulders.
The existing two-way frontage
roads would be converted to
one-way frontage roads in each
direction and would consist of
two, 12-foot lanes with four
foot inside shoulders with
eight-foot outside shoulders.
Two additional U-turn
overpasses would be added to
limit the distance between
turnaround options in the
corridor.
The roadway would maintain an
open ditch system along the
length of the proposed project.
The bridge over the Colorado
River would be constructed on a
new alignment as a six-lane
divided facility to improve
safety. Improvements to the US
90 intersection are also
proposed to realign the
intersection.
Improvements to the Business SH
71 intersection in Columbus are
also planned.
Approximately 84 acres of
additional ROW would be required.
The schematic design plan and
profile sheets are available
online at TxDOT.gov keyword
search, "I-10 from FM 2434",
and at the in-person public
hearing option
for detailed review.
Here's a screenshot of the
legend for the schematics that
you find on the website.
These legends are included on
each page of the schematic, so
you can reference it as you
review the schematics.
The screenshot on the right
shows a colors that build a
proposed design.
These colors identify the
limits in major aspects of the
project.
Let's walk through them.
The yellow color identifies the
main travel lanes on I-10.
The frontage roads are
identified in green.
In between main lanes and
frontage
road lanes will be areas of
blue which are entrance and
exit ramps.
Lastly, areas and dark orange
color identify bridges and
grade denotes existing pavement
to remain.
The screenshot on the left
shows the various types of line
that you'll see.
Of a particular note are the
black lines that outline the
main lanes,
the green lines that outline
frontage roads.
The thin orange dashed lines
indicate existing right-of-way,
and lastly, the thick blue
dashed lines indicate proposed
ROW.
The existing project corridor
does not contain sidewalks or
bicycle accommodations.
Bicycle use may be prohibited,
limited access or
controlled-access highways
within the state of Texas.
The proposed I-10 facility is
not designed to accommodate
pedestrian or bicycle
disabilities on the main lanes,
or on the frontage roads
because of limited access
points and safety concerns with
vehicles traveling at highway
speeds.
Since the last public meeting
held in September 2018 to
present the project alternatives,
the following changes in
activities have occurred.
The project limits have been
shortened approximately 10
miles from SH 71 to FM 2761
(which were the old limits), to
FM 2434 to US 90 (Alleyton Road
South), which are the new
limits.
The proposed improvements to
the segment of I-10 from US 90
to FM 2761 where
environmentally cleared in
September of 2019. The proposed
ROW was decreased to
approximately 84 acres.
And an Opportunity to Comment
was held in February 2020 to
discuss the proposed design
changes with local elected
officials as well as adjacent
and affected property owners.
The proposed project is
consistent with the State Rule
Transportation Plan.
The proposed project would be
funded with a combination of
federal and state funds for a
total of approximately
$272 million.
It is anticipated that the
first phase of construction
would begin in 2026
and take approximately three
years to complete.
The proposed I-10 project would
be subject to final design
considerations, require 84
acres of additional ROW in
would potentially result in
three commercial displacements,
which include two billboards
and a quarry.
The potential residential
structures
displacements may include three
ancillary ranch buildings and a
cistern at one location.
Txdot offers relocation
counseling and financial
assistance to residences and
businesses that are displaced
by the acquisition of highway
ROW.
in accordance with the Uniform
Relocation Assistance in Real
Property Acquisition Policies
Act of 1970.
TxDOT would aid potentially
displaced businesses and
residents.
To learn more about your land
owner rights,
visit txdot.gov and keyword search "landowner's
rights".
The project team identified and
evaluated the potential
environmental impacts that
could occur as a result of the
constructing the proposed
improvements.
Areas reviewed include:
Biological Resources, including
Threatened and Endangered
Species and Habitats,
Community Impacts and
Environmental Justice,
Waters of the US, including
wetlands;
Floodplains and floodways
Hazardous Materials,
Archaeological and
Non-Archeological Historic
Properties,
Section 4(f) and Section 6(f),
Air Quality and Traffic Noise.
The project was designed to
avoid or minimize impacts to
the greatest amount practicable.
A constraints map is online at
txdot. gov keyword search "I-10
from FM 2434",
and an in-person public hearing
option for detailed review
For Biological Resources,
including Tthreatened and
Endangered Species analyses.
Most of the project area
consists
of urbanized habitats within the City of Columbus,
and commercial
areas with the town and Alleyton. Areas
surrounded Glidden, Alleyton,
and outside of Columbus are
rural,
The project area contained
potential habitat for the
federally-listed Houston Toad.
Three years of Houston Toad
breeding season surveys were
concluded with no species, and
a finding of No Effect.
The project area does not contain
any suitable habitat, and it is not within the range
of any
other federally-listed, threatened or endangered species.
The project area is within
range for mussel Species for
Greatest Conservation Need
(SGCN).
Mussel Species Best Management
Practices, including surveys,
will be conducted prior to
construction.
For Community Impacts and
Environmental Justice:
Long-term positive impacts are expected
with improved traffic flow and safety, and reduced
congestion.
No adverse community impacts
are anticipated with the proposed project.
No disproportionately high nor
adverse impacts
to The Limited English Proficiency (LEP) or
minority
populations are anticipated.
And there are potential
displacements at four locations,
including one residential
location and three commercial
locations.
For water resources,
a Section 404 permit may be
required for
impacts to Waters of the US, including wetlands.
Coordination with the United
States Army
Corps of Engineers is in progress.
The proposed project would not
increase the base flood elevation to a level that would
violate
applicable floodplain regulations and ordinances.
Potential concerns were found
during
the Hazardous Materials initial site assessment process.
However, these concerns were
resolved
and no hazardous materials related action is
required for the project area.
One archeological resource
eligible for
listing on the National Register of Historic
Places
may potentially be displaced for the proposed
project.
Additional archaeological
surveys would be conducted
after ROW is acquired
Mitigation for any cultural
resources
impacted by the project would be coordinated
with the Texas Historical Commission.
No historic structures are
properties
eligible for listing on the
National
Register of Historic Places would be impacted by the
proposed project.
An analysis of section 4(f) and
6(f)
properties determined the no parks and recreation areas
would be
impacted in the proposed project area.
A traffic noise analysis was
conducted in accordance with
state and federal guidelines.
The traffic noise analysis
determine that out of 15
representative receivers, 11
locations were predicted to have noise levels that approach
or exceeded the
FHWA noise abatement criteria under the
Build Alternative; therefore the proposed project would
result in traffic noise impacts,
None of the and tested
noise barriers were both reasonable and feasible;
therefore, no abatement
measures are proposed for the
project.
The proposed project is
included in the State Implementation Plan and would not
adversely impact air quality in the region.
Here's a project process, and
next steps.
This Virtual Public Hearing is
being held to
present the Proposed Improvements to I-10
within the project limits,
changes in project design since
the last public meeting
present the outcome of the
environmental
analyses, and gather public and stakeholder
input.
After the comment period closes,
TxDOT will review the comments received and prepare a Virtual
Public Hearing
summary report with comments,
The summary report
will be posted to the project website, approximately four months after
the close of the comment period.
The next steps include
finalizing the environmental analysis, including comments,
received at the
Virtual Public Hearing,
Provided that the environmental
documents and process are
approved,
the project would then move
into the detailed design.
and ROW, acquisition could
begin.
As stated earlier, construction
is programmed to begin in 2026.
The project team anticipates
that construction
could take approximately three years.
TxDOT encourages you to review
the materials posted on the virtual
public hearing website and to
provide written comments.
The comment form is located on
the hearing website.
Comments must be received via
email or
mailed and postmarked by Friday October 8, 2021,
to be included in the official Virtual Public Hearing summary
report.
You can submit written comments
in the following ways:
Via email to Alan.Migl@txdot.
gov.
Spelled A-L-A-N.M-I-G-L@txdot.
gov
Via Mail to the TxDOT Yoakum
District Attention: Alan Mingl
403 Huck Street Yoakum, Texas
77995. You may also leave a
comment verbally by calling
(979) 459-2467,
again, responses to the
comments received during the comment period will be included in the
virtual public hearing summary report that will be
posted on the project website in approximately four months.
Please contact us with any
questions
at any time during the project development.
Please feel free to contact the
TxDOT Yoakum District office at
(361) 293 4436 or follow us on
Twitter @TxDOTYoakum.
Thank you for participating in
this Virtual Public Hearing
with In-Person option.
Please remember to submit your comments by Friday, October 8th
2021.
This will conclude the public
hearing presentation.